30th Imperishable: Reliance on Explicit Scriptures.

What then are explicit scriptures, what are implicit scriptures?

The scriptures which are taught to enter the way are called implicit; while the scriptures which
are taught to enter the fruit are called explicit.

The scriptures which are taught demonstrating concealed truth are called implicit; while the
scriptures which are taught demonstrating the highest truth are called explicit.

The scriptures which are taught to enter into action and duties are called implicit; while the
scriptures which are taught for the sake of cessation of action and vices are called explicit.

The scriptures which are taught to explain impurities are called implicit; while the scriptures
which are taught for the sake of purification are called explicit.

The scriptures which are taught as producing disgust for existence are called implicit; while
the scriptures which are taught to enter non-duality of extinction and existence are called
explicit.

The scriptures which are taught with various words and syllables are called implicit; while
the scriptures which are taught as deep, hard to see through and hard to understand are called
explicit.

The scriptures with many words and syllables taught to please the thoughts of living beings
are called implicit; while the scriptures with few words and syllables taught to produce mental
introspection in living beings are called explicit.

The scriptures proclaiming with various words self, being, life-principle, life-sustaining principle,
spirit, personality, human being, man, acting subject, feeling subject, teaching
there is a ruler where there is no ruler are called implicit; (p. 118) while the scriptures
teaching emptiness, absence of distinguishing marks, that there is nothing to long for,
the unconditioned, unborn, unoriginated, inexistent, selfless, beingless, soulless, personless,
spiritless, absence of a ruler and the gates of liberation are called explicit.

This is called reliance on explicit scriptures, not reliance on implicit scriptures.

