37th Imperishable: The Presence of Recollection Concerned with Moments of Existence.(p. 133)

What then is the bodhisattva’s presence of recollection [being one-pointedness (ekāgratā) through
concentration (samādhi) ] which consists in considering [and discerning with insight
(prajñā) the emptiness of conditioned (saṃskṛta) and unconditioned (asaṃskṛta), sullied (sāsrava)
and unsullied (anāsrava) ] moments of existence?

He sees [the emptiness of essence (śūnyatāsvabhāva), as described below, in] the moments of
existence with the sacred sight of insight [which has the essential character of the absence
of thought-constructions (nirvikalpalakṣaṇa) ] and does not get bewildered in the meantime
until he sits on the place of awakening.

The bodhisattva continually considering the moments of existence does not see any moment of
existence, however small, escaping emptiness, escaping the absence of distinguishing marks,
escaping the fact that there is nothing to long for, escaping unconditionedness, escaping
unbornness, escaping non-existence, escaping the absence of substance [according to the
highest truth (paramārthatas) ], and, [according to the concealed truth (saṃvṛtitas) ] the
bodhisattva continually considering the moments of existence does not see any moment of existence,
however small, escaping dependent origination.

The bodhisattva continually considering the moments of existence sees things according to the
truth, not according to untruth.

What then is truth [the moment of existence]?

The meaning of no self, the meaning of no living being, the meaning of no life-principle, the
meaning of no personality, the meaning of no discontinuity, the meaning of no eternity,
the meaning of no being, the meaning of no absence of being, this is called truth [the moment
of existence].

What then is untruth [not a moment of existence]?

The view of self, the view of living being, the view of soul, the view of person, the view of
discontinuity, the view of eternity, the view of being, the view of absence of being. This
is called untruth [not a moment of existence].

Thus all moments of existence are true, all moments of existence are untrue.Why?Through reflection
on all moments of existence as being emptiness, beyond distinguishing marks and nothing
to long for, all moments of existence are true,but through attachment resulting in views
of me and mine, all moments of existence are not true.

In this way the bodhisattva continually considering the moments of existence does not see any
moment of existence at all which is not the qualities of the Buddha, not awakening, not
the way, not liberation, which is not the way out [of the threefold world (traidhātuka) ].Knowing
that every moment of existence is a way out he attains the gate into the concentration
of great compassion for all beings called “Unhindered”.He gets the notion that all moments
of existence, all vices, are artificial [the knowledge (jñāna) that they are illusory
(māyopama) and without own-being (niḥsvabhāva) ]:“These moments of existence are beyond
vices, they are not connected with vices.”Why?They [the bodhisattvas, or the moments of existence]
are united to explicit meaning [the meaning of emptiness (śūnyārtha) ],so there is
no accumulation of vices, no heaping up, no state of cupidity, no state of aversion, no
state of delusion.Understanding those vices is awakening, and the essence of vices is the
essence of awakening.Though he thus practises recollection, he does not practise anything,
start upon or establish anything.

He knows the true state of things as remaining [forever unchanged through being empty], that
is why the sphere of [all] moments of existence is called a state.(p. 134) The place where
the sphere of [all] moments of existence is situated, there also the sphere of living beings
is situated;the place where the sphere of living beings is situated, there also the sphere
of empty space is situated.That is why all moments of existence are like empty space.

The bodhisattva continually considering moments of existence unites with the qualities of a
Buddha, and though relying on all moments of existence, he relies on the qualities of a Buddha.Though
he produces the knowledge that things perish, he does not make the conditioned
things perish.He produces knowledge of non-origination,and though he produces viewpoints
in living beings [for their benefit by concealed truth (saṃvṛtyā) ], he does not give up the
side of non-origination.

[To summarize:] The presence of recollection concerned with moments of existence is when he
is continually engaged in that recollection of all moments of existence.As many as are the
moments of existence and designations of moments of existence that pertain to disciples,
isolated buddhas, bodhisattvas and Complete Buddhas, he is continually engaged in that recollection
of all of them [that is, understanding their emptiness].

[The meaning of recollection (smṛtyartha):] By that recollection he does not forget or lose
them even until the end of time,continually engaged in that complete recollection of all moments
of existence, by that recollection he does not forget or lose anything even until the
end of time.The presence of recollection which consists in the consideration of moments
of existence is a word designating the immeasurable,a word for universality, for uniting
with all the qualities of the Buddha, for pleasing all beings, for vanquishing all the Evil
Ones, and for reaching self-existent knowledge [beyond thought-constructions (nirvikalpajñāna)
].

This is called the bodhisattva’s presence of recollection which consists in the consideration
of moments of existence.

These, reverend Śāradvatīputra, are called the bodhisattvas’ four imperishable cultivations
of the presence of recollection.

