3rd Imperishable: Practice.

Further, reverend Śāradvatīputra, the bodhisattvas’ practice is imperishable since their intention
is imperishable. Why?

[1. Where practice is imperishable (yatra prayogo ’kṣayaḥ):] The intention of generosity is
the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice, while his practice is the appearance that he
gives away all he has got;

The intention of moral discipline is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice, while his
practice is the appearance of taking upon himself moral discipline, training, the qualities
of asceticism and penance;

The intention of tolerance is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice, while his practice
is the appearance of no aggressive thoughts towards any being;

The intention of vigour is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice, while his action is
the appearance of having all roots of good as the basis;

The intention of meditation is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice, while his practice
is the appearance of purification of his meditation;

The intention of insight is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice, while his practice
is the appearance of purification of what he has learned;

[2. The means by which practice is imperishable (yena prayogo ’kṣayaḥ):] The intention of friendliness,
compassion, joy and equanimity is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice,
while his practice is the appearance of bringing benefits and happiness for living beings,
of joy and confidence in religion, and of getting rid of aversion and attachment;

[3. Where established practice is imperishable (yatra sthitaḥ prayogo ’kṣayaḥ):] The intention
concerning the body is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is purifying
the threefold vow of bodily deeds;the intention concerning speech is the bodhisattva’s
imperishability of practice since it is giving up the four kinds of sin in speech;the intention
concerning the mind is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is the
absence of covetousness, aversion and wrong views;

[4. How practice is imperishable (yathā prayogo ’kṣayaḥ):] The intention concerning what he
has heard [sūtras and so on, his learning] is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice
since he has no teacher’s secrecy concerning religion;

[5. Why practice is imperishable (yasmāt prayogo ’kṣayaḥ):] The intention of no teacher’s secrecy
concerning religion is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is the
practice of [generating] the thought of omniscience;the intention of [generating] the thought
of omniscience is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is making other
living beings adopt the thought of awakening;the intention of making other living beings
adopt the thought of awakening is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it
is bringing [living beings] in touch with the roots of good;the intention of practice concerned
with the roots of good is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is
transforming into awakening;the intention to transform into awakening is the bodhisattva’s
imperishability of practice since it is attaining all the qualities of a Buddha;the intention
of attaining all the qualities of a Buddha is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of
practice since it is grasping true religion;grasping true religion is the bodhisattva’s imperishable
practice since it is admitting one’s wrongdoings;the intention to admit one’s wrongdoings
is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is to confess one’s sins;the
intention to confess one’s sins is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since
it is to rejoice in all merit;the intention to rejoice in all merit is the bodhisattva’s
imperishability of practice since it is to collect immeasurable accumulations of merit;the
intention to collect immeasurable accumulations of merit is the bodhisattva’s imperishability
of practice since it is seeking all Buddhas;the intention to request [teachings from]
all Buddhas is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is supporting true
religion;the intention to support true religion is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of
practice since it is the deed of a good man [that is, of a bodhisattva or Buddha, whose
action is to make others adopt true religion];the intention of the deed of a good man is the
bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is freeing others from their burden;the
intention of freeing others from their burden is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of
practice since it is never to take off the strong armour [of vigour (vīrya) ];the intention
never to take off the strong armour [of vigour (vīrya) ] is the bodhisattva’s imperishability
of practice since it is carrying out the duties of all beings;

Further, reverend Śāradvatīputra, these four are the bodhisattva’s imperishable practices. What
four?

1) The imperishability of practice being the thought of awakening; 2) the imperishability of
practice being explanation, the gift of religion; 3) the imperishability of practice to bring
beings to maturity; 4) the imperishability of practice to accumulate roots of the good;
these are the four imperishable practices.

Again, there are four imperishable practices. What four? 1) The imperishability of practice
which consists in tirelessness in conforming to the qualities of asceticism and penance when
living in the wilderness; 2) the imperishability of practice which consists in tirelessness
in amassing accumulations of merit and knowledge; 3) the imperishability of practice
which consists in tirelessness in the quest for learning; 4) the imperishability of practice
which consists in tirelessness in knowing how to transform into awakening; these are the
four imperishable practices.

Again, there are four imperishable practices. What four? 1) The imperishability of practice
which consists in understanding numbers [writing, calculation and seals (lipigaṇanāmudrādijñānam)
]; 2) the imperishability of practice which consists in understanding weights [measures
of capacity and weights of gold and silver (droṇakarṣāditulanājñānam) ]; 3) the imperishability
of practice which consists in understanding examination [of the quality of things
like clothes and goods (vastraratnādijñānam) ]; 4) the imperishability of practice which
consists in understanding through inspection [of bodily qualities of men, elephants, horses
etc. (puruṣahastyaśvādyaṅgamaṇividyādijñānam) ]; these are the four imperishable practices.

Again, there are four imperishable practices. What four? 1) The imperishability of practice
which consists in understanding the cause of impurity; 2) the imperishability of practice
which consists in understanding the cause of purity; 3) the imperishability of practice which
consists in proclaiming the cause of impurity; 4) the imperishability of practice which
consists in proclaiming the qualities and advantages of purity; these are four imperishable
practices.

Again, there are four imperishable practices. What four? 1) The imperishability of practice
which consists in investigating the parts of personality [as being like an illusion (māyopama)
]; 2) the imperishability of practice which consists in investigating the spheres of
perception [as being like an empty city (śūnyagrāmopama) ]; 3) the imperishability of practice
which consists in investigating the fields of perception [as being like snake poison
(yathāśiviṣa) ]; 4) the imperishability of practice which consists in investigating dependent
origination [all things arise from causes and conditions (hetupratyaya) ]; these are four
imperishable practices.

Again, there are four imperishable practices. What four? 1) The imperishability of practice
which consists in explaining that conditions are impermanent; 2) the imperishability of practice
which consists in explaining that conditions are suffering; 3) the imperishability
of practice which consists in explaining that all moments of existence are selfless; 4) the
imperishability of practice which consist in explaining the enjoyment of peace in extinction;
these are four imperishable practices.

In short, reverend Śāradvatīputra, all the bodhisattva’s practices are inclined towards omniscience,
directed towards omniscience, and bent upon omniscience. And since omniscience is
imperishable [being like open space (ākāśasama) ], therefore all the practices of the bodhisattvas
are also imperishable.

This, reverend Śāradvatīputra, is called the bodhisattvas’ imperishable practice.

