56th-62nd Imperishable: The Seven Limbs of Awakening.

Further, reverend Śāradvatīputra, the bodhisattvas’ seven limbs of awakening are also imperishable.

What then are the seven limbs of awakening?

1) The limb of awakening of recollection, 2) the limb of awakening of discerning moments of
existence, 3) the limb of awakening of vigour, 4) the limb of awakening of joy, 5) the limb
of awakening of calming, 6) the limb of awakening of concentration, 7) the limb of awakening
of equanimity.

1) What then is the limb of awakening of recollection?

The recollection by which he penetrates moments of existence, reflecting on moments of existence
[understanding the complete reality (dharmadhātu) ], examining moments of existence [understanding
the way (mārga) to complete reality (dharmadhātu) ], having a general view of
moments of existence [understanding the books (grantha) describing that way (mārga) ], pondering
on [the meaning (artha) of the] moments of existence, and understanding moments of
existence [by repeated meditation (bhāvanā) ], by that recollection he penetrates the essential
characteristic of moments of existence.

What then is the essential characteristic of moments of existence?All moments of existence are
empty of essential characteristics.

That by means of which there is such recollection and understanding is called the limb of awakening
of recollection.

2) What then is the limb of awakening of discerning moments of existence?

Knowledge of discerning the eighty-four thousand multitudes of moments of existence.He discerns
as they should be discerned the moments of existence, the explicit in meaning as explicit
in meaning, the implicit in meaning as implicit in meaning, concealed meaning as concealed
meaning, the highest truth as the highest truth, the conventions as conventions, the
decided as decided.

This is called the limb of awakening of discerning moments of existence.

3) What then is the limb of awakening of vigour?

Effort in order to attain exertion, endurance, power, courage, never turning back, eagerness,
strength, never putting down the burden, [effort to attain] understanding of the way, [all
these things being] concerned with this recollection, this discerning of moments of existence,
joy, calming, concentration and equanimity.This is called the limb of awakening of
vigour.

4) What then is the limb of awakening of joy?(p. 143) The joy of religion, the serenity of religion,
and the delight in religion by which there is no depression in thought but rather
faith and eagerness, the joy of religion by which there is the allaying and destruction of
vices in body and thought.

This is called the limb of awakening of joy.

5) What then is the limb of awakening of calming?

By calming the body, calming the thoughts, pacifying vices there are no hindrances, and thoughts
are stopped so as to enter peaceful meditation which is the object of this.

This is called the limb of awakening of calming.

6) What then is the limb of awakening of concentration?

The concentrated [i. e., one-pointed in emptiness (śūnyatā) ] thought by which he wakes up to
knowledge of the moments of existence, not the unconcentrated [and discursive (saprapañca)
] thought;the concentrated thought by which he wakes up to those moments of existence [i.
e., understanding their emptiness (śūnyatā) ], not the unconcentrated thought.He does not
wake up by way of having done away with view-points and the potentialities and manifestations
[of vices],but he wakes up to the sameness of all moments of existence [in that they
are empty] through the sameness and homogeneity of all moments of existence.

This is called the limb of awakening of concentration.

7) What then is the limb of awakening of equanimity?

It is having thoughts which are not overwhelmed by moments of existence that have any part in
pleasure and depression;not being carried away by worldly things and thus not being disturbed
since not being [i. e., not having thoughts] dependent on the high and low [on success
or misfortune];having no [feeling of] violence [even though hurt];not being carried away
[getting into the power of contrary factors (vipakṣa) ];having no likes or dislikes,but
being in accordance with the way of the sacred truths.

This is the limb of awakening of equanimity.

Those, reverend Śāradvatīputra, are called the bodhisattvas’ seven imperishable limbs of awakening.

