75th – 78th Imperishable: Summaries of Religion.

Further, reverend Śāradvatīputra, the bodhisattvas’ four summaries of religion are also imperishable.

What four?

1) Entering the knowledge of the bodhisattvas’ imperishable teaching that all conditioned things
are impermanent;2) entering the knowledge of the bodhisattvas’ imperishable teaching
that all conditioned things are suffering;3) entering the knowledge of the bodhisattvas’ imperishable
teaching that all moments of existence are selfless;and 4) entering the knowledge
of the bodhisattvas’ imperishable teaching that extinction is peace.

1) What then does ’impermanent’ refer to?

It [impermanent as here intended] refers to non-existence [that all moments of existence are
empty (śūnya),according to highest truth (paramārthatas) there is no state of permanence
(nityabhāva) in any moment of existence (dharma) imagined as subject and object (grāhyagrāhakaparikalpita)]and
non-attachment [as there is no existent substance (bhava) as “me” and
“mine”, etc. (ātmâtmīya) to be attached to],not the disappearance of something existent [not
that something exists and then does not exist when it has disappeared, but rather that
things are essentially not permanent, that is, originally non-existent];impermanent refers
to the absence of self in all moments of existence and there [in that emptiness (śūnyatā),
being permanently empty (nityaśūnya) ] there is no disappearance as it is [always (nityam)
] apart from any essential existence [of subject and object (grāhyagrāhaka) ].

This is what ’impermanent’ refers to.

2) What then does ’suffering’ refer to?

Suffering refers to absence of joy;joy perishing is what suffering refers to,that there is nothing
to long for is what suffering refers to,explaining the word suffering is what suffering
refers to [it perishes being only a word, saying the word suffering perishes in suffering
since no entity (vastu or bhāva) of suffering is found],explaining what empty space is
is what suffering refers to [as suffering is nothing but emptiness, and the referendum in
question when explaining what is empty like space is the referendum of suffering].

This is what ’suffering’ refers to.

3) What then does ’selflessness’ refer to?

The self [which is of two kinds, the one constructed (kalpita) by others, and the one appearing
in connection with subject and object (grāhyagrāhaka), is without the true existence of
a self (ātmabhāva) and thus] is absolutely selfless,what selflessness refers to is vain,
meaningless, void and empty,and what emptiness refers to is what selflessness refers to.

This is what ’selflessness’ refers to.

4) What then does ’peaceful’ refer to

The peaceful does not get peaceful by peace, the peaceful itself is peaceful [peaceful means
empty (śūnya) or extinguished (nirvṛta), but it does not become peaceful or empty through
knowledge of understanding an essence of peace (śāntasvabhāva) in emptiness or extinction,
things are rather originally and from the beginning peaceful and empty (prakṛtyādiśāntaśūnya)
],and also the non-peaceful does not get peaceful by peace [the conditioned (saṃskṛta)
things in existence do not become peaceful and non-existent after one has understood them
as peaceful and empty through knowledge, they are from the beginning originally unborn
and peaceful (ādiprakṛtyanutpannaśānta) ].What [the word (śabda) ] peaceful refers to is the
allaying of distinguishing marks [like action (karma), vices (kleśa), subject and object
(grāhyagrāhaka) ],this is peace;and [to teach the state of peacefulness (śāntabhāva):] the
peaceful is extinction.

This is what ’peaceful’ refers to.

These, reverend Śāradvatīputra, are the bodhisattvas’ four imperishable summaries of religion.

