9th Imperishable: Meditation.(p. 54)

Then the venerable Śāradvatīputra addressed himself to the bodhisattva Akṣayamati: – Well spoken
by you, son of good family, was this imperishability of the bodhisattvas’ vigour. May
you be inspired, son of good family, on the subject of the imperishability of the bodhisattvas’
meditation, as to how the meditation of the bodhisattvas becomes imperishable.

Akṣayamati said: [1. The state of pure excellence of the forms of meditation (dhyānâkāraviśuddhaviśeṣasthiti):]
The bodhisattvas’ imperishability of the perfection of meditation has
sixteen forms, reverend Śāradvatīputra, but it is not found among disciples and isolated buddhas.

What then are the sixteen forms?1) [It is hard to practise (duṣkaraviśeṣa):] The meditation
of the bodhisattvas is not attached to anything [to reflecting (vitarka) and pondering (vicāra)
related to the parts of the four states of meditation (dhyāna) and the four states of
concentration (samāpatti), etc.], since it is to fulfil the meditation of the Tathāgatas;2)
the meditation of the bodhisattvas is not tasted since there is no attachment to one’s
own pleasure;3) the meditation of the bodhisattvas has great compassion as its object [on
entering the first state of meditation (prathamadhyāna) ] since it practised to take away
the vices of all living beings;4) the meditation of the bodhisattvas is returning from concentration
[on higher stages] since it has the world of desire as its object;5) [pure by
power of supernormal knowledge and great magic (abhijñāvikurvāṇavaśitāviśuddha):] the meditation
of the bodhisattvas has completed the preparations for supernormal knowledge since
it knows the mental behaviour of all beings;6) [the pure excellence of power to attain power
of thought (cittavaśitāprāptivaśitāviśuddhaviśeṣa):] the meditation of the bodhisattvas
is fitness of thought since it is knowledge of the power of thought;7) [the excellence of
power of how to enter, stay in and emerge from (praveśasthitivyutthānaviśeṣa):] the meditation
of the bodhisattvas is knowledge of all meditations, liberations, concentrations, attaining
the states of meditation and emerging from them, since it conquers both the world
of forms and the world without forms;8) [the excellence of power distinguished in being supramundane
(lokottaraviśiṣṭavaśitāviśeṣa):] the meditation of the bodhisattvas is peaceful,
absolutely peaceful, since it conquers the states of meditation of the disciples and the
isolated buddhas;9) [the excellence of power not to lose meditation (acyutivaśitāviśeṣa)
though getting out of meditation:] the meditation of the bodhisattvas is undisturbed since
its certitude is infinite;10) [the excellence of power of no (hindrances concerning) objects
to be known and vices (jñeyaniṣkleśavaśitāviśeṣa):] the meditation of the bodhisattvas
is contrary to wrong practice since it obliterates all habits of vice which are connections
to new births;11) [the pure excellence of views grasping neither for a living being nor
for moments of existence (sattvadharmagrāhâpagatadṛṣṭiviśuddhaviśeṣa):] the meditation of
the bodhisattvas is penetration into insight since it is transcending all worlds [which are
attachment resulting from grasping for a living being or moments of existence (sattvadharmagrāhâbhiniveśa)
];12) [the pure excellence of doing good (anugrahaviśuddhaviśeṣa) with
help to living beings in every way (sarvatra sattvânugraha):] the meditation of the bodhisattvas
is (p. 55) preceded by intentions regarding all living beings since it is saving all
living beings [from the suffering of lower existence and existence generally (durgatibhāvaduḥkha)
];13) [the pure excellence of power not to interrupt the tradition of the three
jewels (triratnavaṃśânupacchedavaśitāviśuddhaviśeṣa):] the meditation of the bodhisattvas
is the unbrokenness of the tradition of the three jewels since it is the fulfilment of the
imperishability of the Tathāgata’s meditation;14) [the pure excellence of not losing it
(acyutiviśuddhaviśeṣa):] the meditation of the bodhisattvas does not perish since they are
always concentrated [in every situation, going, sitting, etc.];15) [the state of excellence
of knowledge (jñānaviśeṣasthiti):] the meditation of the bodhisattvas is knowledge which
is mastery of all moments of existence since it is the fulfilment of all the qualities of
the Buddha;16) [with greatness of completion (niṣṭhāgamanamahātmyasaṃpanna):] the meditation
of the bodhisattvas pervades all space because of the greatness of its knowledge.

This, reverend Śāradvatīputra, is the bodhisattvas’ perfection of meditation in sixteen forms,
which does not belong to the disciples and isolated buddhas.

[2. The pure fruit resulting from the tranquility of meditation (dhyānapraśrabdhiviśuddhaphala):]
What then has meditation as its preparation? Fulfilment of supernormal knowledge and
wisdom.What then is supernormal knowledge, what is wisdom?

When he sees the appearance of all forms [with divine sight (divyacakṣur) ], it is called supernormal
knowledge; when he knows the essence of all forms to be imperishable, but does not
realize this imperishable essence [viz. extinction (nirvāṇa), as the disciples do], it
is called wisdom.

When he hears all words [with divine hearing (divyaśrotra) ], it is called supernormal knowledge;
the knowledge that cannot be expressed by any words from endless past into the endless
future [that is, knowledge without object (anālambana) ], is called wisdom.

When he knows the mental behaviour of all living beings, it is called supernormal knowledge;
when he does not realize the cessation of thought when experiencing the cessation of thought,
it is called wisdom.

Recollection concerning all past and future is called supernormal knowledge; knowledge not attached
to any of the three times [knowing their sameness] is called wisdom.

Going to all Buddha-fields is called supernormal knowledge; when he knows the Buddha-fields
to be like empty space, it is called wisdom.

Seeking the unadulterated moments of existence is called supernormal knowledge; knowledge of
seeing all moments of existence as the same is called wisdom.

That which has the essential characteristic of not being adulterated in any world is called
supernormal knowledge; knowledge of that which is not mingled with any world is called wisdom.

That which triumphs over the king of gods, the lord of the world and the world-protectors [by
the power of the end of the sullied states (āsravakṣayaprabhāvena) ] is called supernormal
knowledge; knowledge higher than that of disciples and isolated buddhas is called wisdom.

These two, reverend Śāradvatīputra, are said to have the bodhisattvas’ meditation as preparation.

[3. Since it is the antidote of an immeasurable contrary, it is an immeasurable antidote (apramāṇaḥ
pratipakṣo ’pramāṇasya vipakṣasya pratipakṣabhūtatvāt):]Further, as many as are the
vices and unconcentrated thoughts of all living beings, so great is the bodhisattvas’ accumulation
of meditation [that is, the cause of meditation (dhyānahetu) ] and his knowledge
of arresting thoughts [the fruit (phala) ];as many as are the vices and unconcentrated thoughts
of all living beings, so great is the bodhisattvas’ gathering of the accumulation
of meditation.

[4. By the etymology (nirukti) is shown the purity of being established in the undifferentiatedness
of objects (ālambanâprabhinnatva):] He is established in that sameness, and thus he
is called concentrated.(p. 56) He is established in the sameness of all living beings, in
the sameness of thoughts, in the sameness of intention, in the sameness of determination,
in the sameness of action, in the sameness of generosity, morality, tolerance, vigour, meditation
and insight, in the sameness of all the teachings of the Buddhas, and thus he is
called concentrated.

What concentration is the same as, awakening is also the same as that [both being empty];what
awakening is the same as, all beings are also the same as that;what all beings are the same
as, all moments of existence are also the same as that.He has entered this sameness, thus
he is called concentrated.

What emptiness is the same as, absence of distinguishing marks is also the same as that; what
absence of distinguishing marks is the same as, all beings are also the same as that; what
all beings are the same as, all moments of existence are also the same as that. He has
entered this sameness, thus he is called concentrated.

What absence of distinguishing marks is the same as, no longing is also the same as that; what
no longing is the same as, all beings are also the same as that; what all beings are the
same as, all moments of existence are also the same as that. He has entered this sameness,
thus he is called concentrated.

What no longing is the same as, the unconditioned is also the same as that; what the unconditioned
is the same as, all beings are also the same as that; what all beings are the same
as, all moments of existence are also the same as that. He has entered this sameness, thus
he is called concentrated.

What the unconditioned is the same as, the unoriginated is also the same as that; what the unoriginated
is the same as, all beings are also the same as that; what all beings are the
same as, all moments of existence are also the same as that. He has entered this sameness,
thus he is called concentrated.

What the unoriginated is the same as, the unproduced is also the same as that; what the unproduced
is the same as, all beings are also the same as that; what all beings are the same
as, all moments of existence are also the same as that. He has entered this sameness, thus
he is called concentrated.

What the unproduced is the same as, the inexistent is also the same as that; what the inexistent
is the same as, all beings are also the same as that; what all beings are the same as,
all moments of existence are also the same as that. He has entered this sameness, thus he
is called concentrated.

What the inexistent is the same as, purity is also the same as that; what purity is the same
as, all beings are also the same as that; what all beings are the same as, all moments of
existence are also the same as that. He has entered this sameness, thus he is called concentrated.

(p. 57) [For a long time cultivating it] he has entered the sameness of all beings’ thoughts
which are the same as one’s own thoughts [in being essentially and originally pure], thus
he is called concentrated.

[5. Giving up mental effort concerned with being an antidote (pratipakṣamanasikāraprahāṇa),
meditation is]sameness in any benefit and injury,[that is,] to have thoughts the same as earth,thoughts
the same as water,thoughts the same as fire,thoughts the same as wind,thoughts
the same as space, [to illustrate it with examples];not to behave so as to be conceited
[when succeeding] or depressed [when failing in bodhisattva-meditation],being undisturbed;to
be concentrated in all bodily movement,not artificial in bodily movement [being concentrated
in construing each movement (pratyekaṃ parikalpayitvā samāhitaḥ) ],[but] naturally
in a state of concentration,(prakṛtisamāpannatā),not agitated or wavering,moderation in speech,and
no bad speech;knowing the meaning [of the teachings that things are empty, selfless,
etc.] and knowing the [words, letters, etc., of the] teachings [both teaching the knowledge
of the things on which to meditate (bhāvayitavyajñāna) ];knowing the time [that is,
the seasons when to meditate], knowing [which] time [of the day to meditate], knowing the
inopportune [and thus the time to get up, eat, walk about, etc., three items teaching the
knowledge of the time of meditation (bhāvanākālajñāna) ];not to be mingled with the world
though connected with all worlds,[combining in the bodhisattvas’ meditation (dhyāna) insight
and expedient means yoked in a team (prajñopāyayuganaddhaparigṛhīta), in the way that he
is] beyond the eight ways of the world,not mingled with any of the vices,aloofness of behaviour
even in crowds;the bodhisattva stays within these moments of existence and does not
give up the state of being concentrated [by insight (prajñā) ], but even so he manifests
himself in every worldly matter [through expedient means (upāya) ].

This, reverend Śāradvatīputra, is called the bodhisattva’s perfection of meditation brought
about through insight and expedient means.

What then is the bodhisattva’s expedient means, what is his insight?

[6. Staying with the purified antidote (viśuddhapratipakṣasthiti), by which is explained fully
how insight and expedient means yoked in a team are combined (prajñopāyayuganaddhaparigṛhīta)
in the bodhisattva’s meditation (dhyāna):]

When the bodhisattva in a state of concentration with regard for living beings produces thoughts
with great compassion as the object, it is the bodhisattva’s expedient means; when he
practises meditation which is peace [and thus beyond thought-constructions and action], it
is his insight.

When the bodhisattva in a state of concentration has confidence that he will attain the knowledge
of a Buddha, it is his expedient means; when he practises meditation not dependent on
any moment of existence whatsoever, it is his insight.

When the bodhisattva in a state of concentration has grasping true religion in view, it is his
expedient means; when he practises meditation inseparable from absolute reality, it is
his insight.

When the bodhisattva during his states of concentration realizes the embellishment of a Buddha’s
body [with the characteristics of a great man and the marks of beauty (lakṣaṇānuvyañjana)
], it is his expedient means; when he practises meditation inseparable from the body
of absolute reality, it is his insight.

When the bodhisattva in a state of concentration thinks about the Buddha’s speech being like
the voice of Brahmā, it is his expedient means; when he meditates on the ineffability of
the true nature of things, it is his insight.

When the bodhisattva in a state of concentration masters thought in a way that it becomes [invulnerable
(avraṇita) to the vices and able to crush the vices] like diamond, it is his expedient
means; when he meditates on the originally undistracted [the essence of thought beyond
subject and object], it is his insight.

When the bodhisattva in a state of concentration masters maturing living beings through his
earlier vows [from the time when he first produced the thought of awakening (prathamacittotpāda)
], it is his expedient means; when he meditates on the selflessness of all beings,
it is his insight.

When he in a state of concentration meditates reaching for all roots of the good, it is his
expedient means; when he meditates on the location of the roots of good as similar to empty
space [seeing that meditation and roots of good are without essence (niḥsvabhāva) ], it
is his insight.

When he in a state of concentration realizes the purity of his Buddha-field, it is his expedient
means; when he meditates on the Buddha-field’s likeness to empty space, it is his insight.

(p. 58)When he in a state of concentration realizes as an object the splendour of the embellishment
of the place of awakening, it is his expedient means; when he meditates to calm all
vices, it is his insight.

When he in a state of concentration wishes to turn the wheel of religion, it is his expedient
means; when he meditates on neither turning nor not turning, it is his insight.

When the bodhisattva in a state of concentration realizes the absence of distraction in the
accumulation of the members of awakening, it is his expedient means;when he practises meditation
in accordance with all that is determined for the bodhisattva to get rid of all the
burning pains of vices and impurities [that torment the train of thoughts (cittasaṃtāna)
] known by the Tathāgatas, mental or not mental, beyond perception or through perception,
it is his insight.

The bodhisattva provided with such qualities is imperishable through the perfection of meditation,
and none of the Evil Ones are able to get at him; he is near to the vessel filled with
all the qualities of the Buddha, and he attains the wisdom of omniscience.

When this imperishability of peaceful meditation was taught, the concentration named “Light
of the sun” was attained by thirty-two thousand bodhisattvas.

Why is that concentration called “Light of the sun“?

Just as all the lights of the moon and the stars, the light of oil-lamps, and the light of grass
on fire is eclipsed when the sun rises, in the same way, when the bodhisattva has attained
the concentration “Light of the sun”, all inferior and limited insight is eclipsed by
the light of his insight, the insight of those still to be trained and the trained, the
insight of the isolated buddhas and the insight of all ordinary beings besides is eclipsed
by the light of his insight; and that is why it is called “Light of the sun“.

The bodhisattva abiding in the perfection of meditation attains different forms of concentration
in a number amounting to several billion times a million times a hundred thousand, so
only a small fraction of them is taught here:

Thus, these concentrations (samādhi) are infinite (ananta) and immeasurable (aprameya), and
the excellent (pravarottama) and fearless (nirbhaya) bodhisattvas who have perfected these
ten million times a thousand billion meditations (dhyānakoṭinayutapāramiṃgata), these very
steadfast (dṛḍhavara) great beings (mahāsattva) understand pure concentration (viśuddhasamādhi).

This, reverend Śāradvatīputra, is called the bodhisattvas’ imperishable meditation.

